Okay, it's time to talk
about the circle of life.
So every component has a life cycle
that starts when it's created and
ends when it is destroyed.
And there's a handful of functions
that allow you to run code inside
your component at key moments
during that life cycle.
The one that you're gonna use most
frequently is called onMount.
And it's a function that allows you to
specify a callback that will get invoked
when the component is
first mounted to the DOM.
So in this exercise we have a canvas
element that we would like to animate
using the paint function
in this gradient.js file.
It's just gonna take an input
canvas context and a value t and
it's gonna do some maths and it's gonna
turn that into a colorful canvas.
So we'll first import
onMount into our component.
And then we'll call onMount,
pass it a callback.
And first up,
we're gonna get a reference to that canvas
element using document querySelector.
And if alarm bells are ringing that we
shouldn't be using document.querySelector,
you're absolutely right.
But we're gonna come to
that in a later exercise.
Begin by doing canvas =
document.querySelector('canvas').
And then if you haven't used the Canvas
API before, once you've got your reference
to the element, you then need to create
a canvas context that you can paint with.
const context = canvas.getContext('2d').
2d is opposed to WebGL.
And then we're gonna do some work in
a loop, gonna call requestAnimationFrame.
And inside here we're gonna have a named
function so that we can refer to it,
that takes a value t,
which is the current time.
Inside the loop,
the first thing we're gonna do is call
the loop again inside another
requestAnimationFrame.
And then we're gonna call our paint
function using the context that we just
created with the t value that got passed
into the requestAnimationFrame handler.
So now, this function is being
called roughly 60 times a second.
Okay, there is a problem with
the code that we just wrote.
And this is kind of an easy
thing to overlook, but
it's important not to make this mistake.
If you're doing some work in onMount,
you need to make sure that you undo
it when the component is unmounted.
And the way that we're gonna do that
is by returning a function that
calls some cleanup code.
Any function that is returned from onMount
will get called when the component is
destroyed.
In our case,
we wanna cancel the AnimationFrame
to stop this loop from running.
In order to do that, we need to
create a frame variable locally.
And we need to assign to that every
time we call requestAnimationFrame.
And then in the return callback,
we just call cancelAnimationFrame and
pass that ID in.
And so, now when this component
is taken off the screen,
we'll stop running that loop.
Now, as you saw, we had that code running,
and it continued to run, and
it was actually kind of fine.
It was just updating a canvas
that you couldn't see anymore,
which is obviously no use.
If you did that too many times in the same
app, you would eventually start to
run into memory leaks, and that's
something that we very much want to avoid.
We have other lifecycle functions.
beforeUpdate and afterUpdate
are lifecycle functions that are called
immediately before the DOM is updated and
immediately after the DOM is updated.
So basically, in Svelte we are dealing
with declarative state, but
occasionally we need to break out of that.
We need to use an escape hatch to
access the DOM directly because some
things are hard to do in
a purely state-driven way.
So this is the Eliza chatbot.
Before there was ChatGPT,
there was Eliza, this comes from the 70s.
And it's pretty cool.
No, actually, everything is great.
We can talk to it,
the only problem is the messages aren't
appearing because we got a scroll,
completely misunderstood me.
No, I'm very positive, right?
[LAUGH] You're being a bit negative.
But we have to do that every time we add
some more content because the DOM doesn't
know that it needs to scroll.
But we can fix that using beforeUpdate and
afterUpdate.
We'll begin by creating
an auto scroll value.
This is gonna track whether or not we
currently should be in auto scroll mode.
I'm gonna default to false.
Now the first time
beforeUpdate gets called,
the dev might not have been
rendered to the DOM yet.
So we're getting a reference to
the development using something
called bind this, which we'll
discover in a later exercise, for
now just pretend that this makes sense.
So if the div has been created,
then we wanna calculate whether or
not we should be in auto scroll mode.
And the way that we're gonna do that
is by figuring out what the distances
between the bottom of the scroll area and
the outer container.
And it took me a few
go's to get this right.
This is the sort of thing
that I struggle with.
So I'm just gonna copy
the code over from the left.
const scrollableDistance =
div.scrollHeight- div.offsetHeight.
And then we're gonna auto scroll
if there's less than 20 pixels
between the bottom of the window and
the bottom of the container.
And then once we've updated the DOM,
once the new chat messages have been
added to the window,
if we are in auto scroll mode,
Then in that case,
we're gonna call div.scrollTo 0,
and then div.scrollHeight will take
us to the very bottom of the chat.
All right, let's see if that worked.
I don't have a problem.
What is your problem?
And you'll see that it's
auto-scrolling nicely.
If, on the other hand,
we were not near the bottom of the chat,
Then auto-scroll will be false.
And so, when the afterUpdate
function gets invoked,
we are not gonna then scroll
back to the bottom of the chat.
All right, you probably won't find
yourself using beforeUpdate and
afterUpdate all that often.
It's really only when you need to interact
with the DOM in this very specific way.
But it's useful when you do need it.
Another lifecycle function that
we're gonna talk about is tick.
Now, onMount, beforeUpdate, and
afterUpdate all have to get called
while the component is initializing.
It doesn't have to be
inside the script tag.
You could be calling out to
a function in another module, but
it does have to get called while the
component is initializing because that's
how the callbacks get
assigned to that component.
Tick is different.
Tick can get called at any point, and
what tick does is it returns a promise
that resolves when any pending state
updates are applied to the DOM.
The reason this works is that when
you update component state in Svelte,
it doesn't update the DOM immediately.
So when we do count plus equals 1, it's
not updating the text inside the button
right there and then, it's actually
waiting to see if there are any more state
updates that it's gonna need
to apply at the same time.
Because it's more efficient to do things
in a batched way than it is to do them
synchronously.
But that can be tricky if you're
updating state in such a way
that causes the DOM to update in
a way that you need to monitor.
For example, a little bit of a contrived
example, but we've got a text area here.
And if I select some text like this,
and I hit the tab key,
then we have a handleKeyDown function,
which is gonna get
the selection range and
it's gonna turn it to shouty case or
quiet case,
depending on what it currently is.
And so if I select that and
I hit tab, it's done that,
it's turned that text into uppercase text.
But it's also moved my cursor
to the end of the text area,
which is not what I want.
I want the selection to stay in place.
And I have some code here
that should be doing that.
It's resetting the selectionStart and
the selectionEnd.
But it's not having any effect
because the DOM hasn't updated yet.
We're waiting to see if there are any
other state updates that we need to take
account of.
So we can fix this by importing
the tick helper from Svelte.
And then immediately before we call
this.selectionStart = selectionStart,
we're just gonna await that tick.
And so now, if we select some text and
we hit tab, it will uppercase it but
it will preserve the selection.
If I hit it again, it will lowercase it.
Again, this isn't a function
that you will use a whole lot.
In the same way that beforeUpdate and
afterUpdate are really
kind of escape hatches,
tick is an escape hatch for when you
need to interact with the DOM manually.